Question 1 (1/1 point)

In mature neocortical pyramidal cells (and many other cell-types of the mammalian brain), the main place where glutamatergic synapses are found is:
On parent dendrites
On dendritic spines On dendritic spines - correct
On axonal boutons
On axon initial segments

Explanation

For many cells, the excitatory glutamatergic inputs that arrive across the dendritic arborization do not come directly on the main parent dendrites. The main place where glutamatergic synapses are found in mature neocortical pyramidal neurons (and many other mammalian cell-types) is on dendritic spines.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 2 (1/1 point)

What would be a typical length of a dendritic spine?
0.1 nm
10 nm
1 um 1 um - correct
10 um

Explanation

Dendritic spines are ~1 micrometer in length (measured from the spine head to the parent dendrite). The spines grow from the parent dendrite and make contacts with presynaptic specializations.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 3 (1/1 point)

What would be a typical volume of a large spine-head?
1 ul
1 nl
1 pl
1 fl 1 fl - correct

Explanation

Large spine-heads have a length scale of ~1 um. They thus have a volume of ~1 um^3. This correspends to 10^-18 m^3 = 10^-15 l = 1 fl. Most spines are considerably smaller than 1 femtoliter.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 4 (1/1 point)

Which of the following statements regarding the function of dendritic spines is not correct?
Ca2+ signals can be localised to a single dendritic spine
Localised Ca2+ signals in single spines are likely to be important for synapse specific plasticity
Spines are rigid unchanging structures Spines are rigid unchanging structures - correct
The electrical resistance of some spine necks may be so large that the membrane potential in the spine head can differ substantially from the parent dendrite.

Explanation

Calcium rises can occur in spines through activation of NMDA receptors, voltage-gated calcium channels and release of calcium from intracellular stores. It can be difficult for Ca2+ ions to diffuse out of the spine head, because the spine neck can be very small in diameter (~100 nm). This means that Ca2+ signals can be localized to a single dendritic spine, which then might help synaptic plasticity to remain synapse-specific. The spine neck can be so thin that it might offer giga-Ohm resistance, which could significantly filter glutamatergic signalling. However, spines are not rigid unchanging structures, rather they are highly dynamic.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 5 (1/1 point)

Dendritic spines are highly motile structures due to
Actin filaments Actin filaments - correct
Microtubules
Spine apparatus
CaMKII

Explanation

Dendritic spines are highly dynamic structures due to their cytoskeleton, which is rich in actin filaments. Actin is readily polymerised and depolymerised under the control of a variety of mechanisms, forming the basis of motility in many cellular processes.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
