QUESTION 1  (1/1 point)
Ion flux through an ion channel is a passive process driven by electrochemical diffusion. Which statement is true?

 There is no current flow if the ion concentrations are equal on both sides of the membrane.  There is no current flow if the electrical potential is equal on both sides of the membrane.  The electrical potential is more important than the concentration gradient.  For any given concentration of ions there is an electrical potential that prevents net current flow. For any given concentration of ions there is an electrical potential that prevents net current flow. - correct
EXPLANATION

Ions diffuse across ion channels under the influence of both electrical potentials and concentration gradients. There is no net current flow when the electrical potential across the cell membrane equals the reversal potential given by the Nernst equation for a single type of permeating ion or by the Goldmann-Hodgkin-Katz equation for multiple permeating ion species.
 HIDE ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
QUESTION 2  (1/1 point)
What happens to a neuron which has a resting membrane potential of -70 mV, if potassium channels increase their open probability?

 Hyperpolarization Hyperpolarization - correct  Depolarization  Repolarization  Nothing
EXPLANATION

If potassium channels increase their open probability, the potassium conductance increases and the membrane potential of the cell tends to the equilibrium potential of potassium which is ~-90 mV. Since the resting membrane potential is -70 mV, the cell will hyperpolarize in response to the increased potassium conductance.
 HIDE ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
QUESTION 3  (1/1 point)
The equilibrium potential

 of a given ion across a membrane is the potential at which there is no net movement of that ion across the membrane due to electrochemical forces  of K+ across a typical nerve cell membrane is close to the resting potential of most neurons  of a given ion across a membrane is a function of the concentration of that ion on both sides of the membrane  all of the above are correct all of the above are correct - correct
EXPLANATION

All of the above are correct. The equilibrium potential for an ion is the membrane potential at which there is no net movement of that ion across the membrane because the movement of ions due to a concentration gradient is equal but opposite to the movement due to the electrical gradient. The resting membrane potential of neurons is largely determined by potassium leak conductances (but also with significant contribution of other conductances e.g. chloride).
 HIDE ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
QUESTION 4  (1/1 point)
What are the approximate intracellular and extracellular concentrations of potassium for most mammalian neurons?

 Intracellular 150 mM and Extracellular 5 mM Intracellular 150 mM and Extracellular 5 mM - correct  Intracellular 5 mM and Extracellular 150 mM  Intracellular 50 mM and Extracellular 100 mM  Intracellular 100 mM and Extracellular 50 mM
EXPLANATION

The intracellular concentration of potassium is ~150 mM.

The extracellular concentration of potassium is ~5 mM.

Potassium ions make up the vast majority of the intracellular cations.
 HIDE ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
QUESTION 5  (1/1 point)
What are the approximate intracellular and extracellular concentrations of chloride for most mammalian neurons?

 Intracellular 120 mM and Extracellular 5 mM  Intracellular 5 mM and Extracellular 120 mM Intracellular 5 mM and Extracellular 120 mM - correct  Intracellular 25 mM and Extracellular 100 mM  Intracellular 100 mM and Extracellular 25 mM
EXPLANATION

The intracellular concentration of chloride is ~5 mM.

The extracellular concentration of chloride is ~120 mM.

Chloride ions make up the vast majority of the extracellular anions.
 HIDE ANSWER  You have used 1 of 1 submissions
QUESTION 6  (1/1 point)
Calculate the reversal potential of a calcium selective conductance at 37 Celsius if the intracellular calcium concentration is 1 uM and the extracellular calcium concentration is 2 mM.

 -90.0 mV  -103.5 mV  101.5 mV 101.5 mV - correct  203.0 mV
EXPLANATION

The reversal potential can be calculated by using the Nernst equation.

Calcium ions carry a charge of +2 (the variable 'z' in the Nernst equation).

From the Nernst equation for calcium, the reversal potential is:

(61.5 / 2) x log (2 x 10^-3 / 1 x 10^-6)

30.75 x log (2000)

101.5 mV
 HIDE ANSWER
