
Question 1 
What are the approximate dimensions of dendrites of typical neurons in the mammalian brain?

 Length ~500 µm and Diameter ~1 µ
Length ~10 µm and Diameter ~10 nm
Length ~500 µm and Diameter ~10 nm
Length ~10 µm and Diameter ~1 µm


Question 2 
What directly determines the membrane potential at any given time and location in a neuron?

 Transmembrane current flux
Distribution of charges across the membrane 
Axial current flow
Concentration of ions


Question 3 
What do we learn about a dendrite if we know it's "length constant"?

 Thickness of the dendrite
Axial resistance of the dendrite
Spatial attenuation of voltage along the dendrites at steady state 
Length of the dendrite


Question 4 
If we inject a subthreshold current pulse into the soma, what would we observe in recordings of membrane potential at the soma and at a distal dendrite?

 The membrane potential changes would be faster and larger in the dendrite.
The membrane potential changes would be slower and smaller in the dendrite. 
The membrane potential changes would be identical in the soma and dendrite.
It is not possible to evaluate without more information.


Question 5 
When studying the cable properties of two different dendrites, what does it mean that Dendrite 1 has a smaller time constant than Dendrite 2?

 For a given current pulse injection, Dendrite 2 needs less time to reach steady state membrane potential than Dendrite 1
For a given current pulse injection, Dendrite 1 needs less time to reach steady state membrane potential than Dendrite 2 
Dendrite 2 has a lower membrane resistance than Dendrite 1
Dendrite 2 has a lower membrane capacitance than Dendrite 1


Question 6 
When studying the cable properties of two different axons, what does it mean that Axon 1 has a smaller length constant than Axon 2?

 Axon 2 needs less time to reach a given membrane potential than Axon 1
Axon 1 needs less time to reach a given membrane potential than Axon 2
In Axon 2 a change in membrane potential decays more rapidly with distance than in Axon 1
In Axon 2 a change in membrane potential decays less with distance than in Axon 1 

