Question 1 (1/1 point)

What are the main excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the mammalian brain respectively?
Arginine and GABAzine
Dopamine and Glycine
Glutamate and GABA Glutamate and GABA - correct
Acetylcholine and Oxytocin

Explanation

The most important two neurotransmitters in the central nervous system are glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Glutamate is excitatory, driving the postsynaptic neuron towards ~0 mV membrane potential. GABA is inhibitory, driving the postsynaptic membrane potential towards ~-75 mV.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 2 (1/1 point)

What is meant by quantal release of neurotransmitter?
All-or-none exocytosis of a synaptic vesicle All-or-none exocytosis of a synaptic vesicle - correct
Release based on quantum mechanics
All-or-none action potential firing
All-or-none activation of presynaptic ion channels

Explanation

Calcium influx into the presynaptic bouton evoked by an action potential, drives fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic membrane. This is typically an all-or-none event with a single vesicle being released or no vesicle being released. Each synaptic vesicle is filled with a high concentration of neurotransmitter and the exocytosis of a synaptic vesicle therefore causes the release of a quantum a neurotransmitter.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 3 (1/1 point)

What is the approximate diameter of a synaptic vesicle?
4 nm
40 nm 40 nm - correct
400 nm
4 um

Explanation

A synaptic vesicle has a diameter of ~40 nm. It has a lipid bilayer membrane and the inside is packaged with a high concentration of neurotransmitter.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 4 (1/1 point)

Neurons mainly communicate with each other at specialised juntions called synapses, with the presynaptic bouton containing many synaptic vesicles. What is the approximate length scale of a typical synapse in the central nervous system (i.e. approximate diameter of the synaptic contact area)?
5 um
500 nm 500 nm - correct
50 nm
50 um

Explanation

Synapses in the mammalian brain are typically smaller than 1 micron, mostly between 200 to 500 nm.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions
Question 5 (1/1 point)

What is meant by volume transmission?
Exocytosis of a large volume of synaptic vesicles
Signals about the loudness of a sound
Regulation of the amount of neurotransmitter release
Exocytosis of neurotransmitter-filled vesicles into the extracellular space Exocytosis of neurotransmitter-filled vesicles into the extracellular space - correct

Explanation

Most neuronal communication occurs at specialsed junctions called synapses, but neurotransmitters can also be released into the extracellular space, where they can diffuse long distances acting upon many different cells. Volume transmission gains specificity from the localisation of the neurotransmitter receptors.
You have used 1 of 1 submissions 
