Fats contain more energy per gram than carbohydrates and proteins. Excess energy from all three sources can be stored in the body as fat.
Foods with low glycemic index release their energy gradually, avoiding spikes in blood sugar and insulin. Refined sugars have high glycemic index and are broken down quickly, leaving a lot of insulin in the blood that was summoned to take care of it. Natural carbohydrates instead usually decline in tandem with insulin resulting in a more harmonious digestion.
Vegetables contain fibers and unsaturated fats.
Several vegetable protein sources can be combined to provide a more complete protein intake, such as beans and maize or rice and lentils. 
Omega 3 unsaturated fats cannot be made by the human body. 
Unsaturated fats are usually liquid, these are the most healthiest. Saturated fats pack more densely making them solid, they increase LDL cholesterol which can be bad. Trans fats should be avoided, these decrease HDL and can be found in industrially fried food.

Processed food lasts longer because they are so low in nutrients that moulds wont grow.
Eat nutrient dense food and avoid empty calories such as soda.
Consumption of free sugars (not bound in fruit for example) should be less than 10% of total calorie intake, equivalent to around five teaspoons.
Cook at home, make it into a fun hobby. Cook food that gives leftovers like a big pot of soup.
Cooking together bonds families, it is important to teach our children cooking.
To lose weight eat correct, don't stop eating. To change your eating habits successfully make gradual improvements.

Eat real unprocessed food. Not too much. Mostly plants.
Keep a set of staple ingredients always available.
A lot of good meals begin with chopping an onion.

Drinking water before eating and using smaller plates help manage food intake. Fill half the plate with vegetables.
Less ingredients is better. Eat before shopping and bring a list.
Eat food that doesn't require a nutrition label, like fruit.
Eat for quality not quantity. Eat until you are no longer hungry, then stop.
